Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
This video will be the last of the subnetting
series.
Subnetting is very important to understand
so I wanted to take it slowly to make sure
you don’t get confused.
In this video we’ll cover the last few important
things you should know.
So, what exactly will we cover in this video?
First of all, I’ll go over the answers
last video’s quiz questions.
Then, we’ll do a few practice questions
using class A addresses.
Then, we’ll look at another topic in subnetting,
called ‘VLSM’, which stands for ‘variable-length
subnet masks’.
I’ll explain exactly what that is when we
get to it.
Finally, I’ll give you some other resources
where you can get more practice subnetting.
Okay here’s question 1 from the last video.
You have been given the 172.30.0.0/16 network.
Your company requires 100 subnets with at
least 500 hosts per subnet.
What prefix length should you use?
This is a simple one.
How many bits do we have to borrow to make
100 subnets?
You can just count on your fingers.
Borrowing one bit allows for 2 subnets, borrowing
2 bits allows 4 subnets, 3 borrowed bits allows
for 8 subnets, 4 borrowed bits allows for
16 subnets, 5 borrowed bits allows for 32
subnets, 6 borrowed bits allows for 64 subnets,
and 7 borrowed bits allows for 128 subnets.
So, we need to borrow 7 bits to create enough
subnets.
Does that leave enough host bits for at least
500 hosts?
Let’s check.
So, borrowing 7 bits means we will use a /23
prefix length, which leaves 9 host bits.
Once more, the red bits are the host bits.
9 host bits allows 510 usable addresses, which
is enough for the 500 we need.
So, that’s the answer to question 1, the
prefix length will be /23.
/23 is written as 255.255.254.0 in dotted
decimal by the way.
As I mentioned before, make sure you know
how to write different prefix lengths in dotted
decimal, too.
Let’s go on to question 2.
What subnet does host 172.21.111.201/20 belong
to?
These questions are easy if you remember the
steps I taught you.
First write out the address in binary, like
this.
Then, change all of the host bits to 0.
Convert the address back to dotted decimal,
and that’s the answer.
So, host 172.21.111.201/20 belongs to the
subnet 172.21.96.0/20.
Let’s check the answer for question 3 next.
What is the broadcast address of the network
192.168.91.78/26 belongs to?
So, to solve this problem you follow the same
steps as for the previous question, except
instead of changing all host bits to 0, you
change them to 1.
Let’s try it out.
Write out the address in binary.
Then, since we’re looking for the BROADCAST
address, not the network address, change all
of the host bits to 1.
Convert the address back to dotted decimal,
and that’s the broadcast address for the
subnet.
So the answer for question 3 is 192.168.91.127,
that’s the broadcast address for this network.
Let’s check the answer for question 4.
You divide the network 172.16.0.0/16 into
4 subnets of equal size.
Identify the network and broadcast addresses
of the second subnet.
So, the first step to solving this question
is to determine the prefix length we must
use.
To divide the network into 4 subnets of equal
size, we have to borrow 2 bits, because 2
to the power of 2 is 4.
So, when we borrow 2 bits, that makes a /18
prefix length.
Change this last bit to 1, and write it in
dotted decimal again.
172.16.64.0.
This is the network address of the second
subnet.
Now to find the broadcast address, simply
change all of the host bits to 1.
So, the broadcast address is 172.16.127.255.
So, these are the answers to question 4.
Finally, question 5.
You divide the 172.30.0.0/16 network into
subnets of 1000 hosts each.
How many subnets are you able to make?
Well, to know how many subnets we are able
to make, we have to know how many bits we
can borrow.
But, to know how many bits we can borrow,
we need to find how many host bits we need
for 1000 hosts.
We will need 10 host bits for 1000 hosts,
because 2 to the power of 10, minus 2, allows
for 1022 hosts.
That will leave us with 6 borrowed bits.
6 borrowed bits means we can make 64 subnets,
so that’s the answer to question 5.
Okay, let’s get to subnetting class A networks.
Look at the SIZE OF REST BIT FIELD, that is
the host portion.
There are 24 host bits that we can borrow
from, meaning lots of room to make subnets.
However, let me remind you that the process
of subnetting class A, class B, and class
C networks is exactly the same!
So, let’s just do 2 practice questions subnetting
class A networks, and then let’s move on
to VLSM.
You have been given the 10.0.0.0/8 network.
You must create 2000 subnets which will be
distributed to various enterprises.
What prefix length must you use?
How many host addresses, or usable addresses,
will be in each subnet?
Let’s solve this question just like the
other ones.
Here is 10.0.0.0/8 in binary and dotted decimal.
It’s /8, so only the first octet is the
network portion, and we have 3 whole octets
to borrow from and make subnets.
Notice that I wrote the /8 subnet mask down
here, 255.0.0.0.
Currently, we are borrowing 0 bits, so we
can’t make any subnets.
Instead of going through the whole process
of borrowing 1 bit, 2 bits, 3 bits etc. let’s
see if you can do it in your head.
So, 2 to the power of WHAT?
Equals at least 2000?
Remember, each bit you borrow doubles the
number of subnets you can make.
2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024,
2048.
Thats 11 borrowed bits, so the answer is 2
to the power of 11.
So, borrowing 11 bits allows us to create
the required 2000 subnets.
This means we will use a /19 prefix length.
Now, how many hosts will be in each subnet?
Well, there are 13 host bits remaining, so,
that means 8190 hosts per subnet.
So, those are the answers.
We will use a /19 prefix length, and there
will be 8190 hosts addresses, AKA usable addresses,
in each subnet.
This is the same process we used for Class
B and Class C networks, the numbers are just
larger.
Let’s do one more practice question for
a class A network.
PC1 has an IP address of 10.217.182.223/11.
Identify the following for PC1’s subnet:
1) Network address:
2) Broadcast address:
3) First usable address:
4) Last usable address:
5) Number of host (or usable) addresses:
So, feel free to pause this video and figure
out the answer for yourself.
But let’s walk through the answers together now.
Here’s the address written out as a normal
/8, so 8 network bits and 24 host bits.
But it’s not /8, it’s /11, so there are
3 borrowed bits.
To find the network address, change all of
the host bits to 0.
Then change it back to dotted decimal.
So, there’s the network address, 10.192.0.0.
Add 1 to the network address, and you get
the first usable address, which is 10.192.0.1.
Change all of the host bits to 1, and you
get the broadcast address, 10.223.255.255.
Subtract one from the broadcast address and
you get the last usable address.
Finally, to determine the number of host addresses,
count the number of host bits.
There are 21, so that means 2 million, 97
thousand, 1 hundred 50 hosts per subnet.
So, here are the answers to each part of the
question.
As I said before, the process for subnetting
Class A networks is the same as for class
B and class C networks, you just have to get
used to the larger numbers.
Also I hope you’re getting used to converting
between binary and dotted decimal by now,
as you have probably noticed it’s absolutely
essential for subnetting.
So let’s move on to a very important topic,
VLSM, which stands for variable-length subnet
masks.
Until now, we have practiced subnetting used
FLSM (Fixed-Length Subnet Masks).
This means that all of the subnets use the
same prefix length for example, subnetting
a class C network into 4 subnets using /26.
However, VLSM (Variable-Length Subnet Masks)
is the process of creating subnets of different
sizes, to make your use of network addresses
more efficient.
Now, VLSM IS more complicated than FLSM, but
it’s easy if you follow the steps correctly.
So, that’s what I want to teach you now,
the steps to subnet a network using VLSM.
So here’s an example small enterprise network.
There are two LANs in Tokyo, and two LANs
in Toronto.
Tokyo LAN A has has 110 hosts, and Tokyo LAN
B has 8 hosts.
Toronto LAN A has 29 hosts and Toronto LAN
B has 45 hosts.
Also, there is a point-to-point connection
between the two routers that we must assign
IP addresses for.
We are assigned the 192.168.1.0/24 network,
and must divide it into 5 subnets to provide
IP addresses for all hosts in the enterprise
network.
If we were to try this with fixed-length subnet
masks, we would need to borrow 3 bits to make
enough subnets.
That would leave 5 host bits left.
5 host bits only allows 30 host addresses,
so that’s not enough addresses for Tokyo
LAN A or Toronto LAN B. However, if we use
VLSM we can assign different subnet sizes
to each LAN, which will allow us to make sure
each LAN has enough addresses available.
So, what are the steps to subnet using VLSM?
First, assign the largest subnet at the start
of the address space.
Then, assign the second-largest after it.
And then repeat the process until all subnets
have been assigned, from largest to smallest.
If you look at our network here, that means
we will assign subnets in this order.
First, Tokyo LAN A, which requires 110 hosts.
Then Toronto LAN B. Then, Toronto LAN A, Tokyo
LAN B, and finally the point-to-point connection
between the two routers.
So, let’s do Tokyo LAN A. I want you to
pause the video and figure out these five
values by yourself.
Network address, broadcast address, first
usable address, last usable address, and total
number of usable host addresses.
We’ve done lots of practice for this, so
I know you can do it by yourself.
Pause the video now to find the answers….Okay,
let’s check out the answers.
So, I decided to use a /25 prefix length.
Why is that?
Well, a /25 prefix length leaves 7 host bits,
which means a total of 128 address, so 126
usable host adressess.
We need 110, so /25 is the correct prefix
length.
That means the network address is 192.168.1.0/25.
Convert all of the host bits to 1, and this
is the broadcast address, 192.168.1.127.
So, now we have our answers for Tokyo LAN
A. The first usable address is the network
address plus one, and the last usable address
is the broadcast address minus one.
And as I just mentioned, 7 host bits allows for
126 usable host addresses, which is 2 to the
power of 7, minus 2.
So, we now have our first subnet, 192.168.1.0/25
for Tokyo LAN A. That /25 subnet uses up half
of the address space of the 192.168.1.0/24
network, but that’s no problem.
Using VLSM we can assign smaller subnets to
these other LANs, and you’ll see that there
is enough address space left.
So, next we should assign Toronto LAN B. So,
192.168.1.127 is the broadcast address of
Tokyo LAN A. If we add one to that, we will
get the network address of the next subnet,
which will be used for Toronto LAN B. Therefore,
192.168.1.128 is the network address of Toronto
LAN B. But, we’re missing one important
point.
What prefix length should we use for Toronto
LAN B?
So, with this information I want you to do
the same thing for Toronto LAN B. Pause the
video, and find the prefix length we must
use, then the broadcast address, first and
last usable addresses, and total number of
usable host addresses for this subnet.
Pause the video now….okay, let’s check
the answer.
So, to accommodate the 45 hosts we will use
a /26 prefix length.
That leaves 6 host bits, which allows for
62 host addresses.
That’s more than we need, but if we make
a smaller subnet with a /27 prefix length,
we can only have 30 hosts, which is not enough.
So, the complete network address is 192.168.1.128/26.
Change all of the host bits to 1, and you
get the broadcast address, 192.168.1.191.
So here are the answers for Toronto LAN B.
For Tokyo LAN A and Toronto LAN B, we’ve
used address space from 192.168.1.0 through 191.
These two subnets take up three quarters of
the address space, but that’s no problem.
There is still room for more, smaller subnets.
192.168.1.191 is the broadcast address of
Toronto LAN B, so 192.168.1.192 is the network
address of Toronto LAN A. Once again though,
we have to figure out what prefix length to
use for Toronto LAN A.
Let’s do the same process as with the other
LANs.
Please pause the video now to find the remaining
information….okay, hopefully you found the
answers, let’s check.
Toronto LAN A requires 29 hosts, so we should
use a /27 prefix length, which leaves 5 host
bits, and therefore 30 host addresses.
So, 192.168.1.192/27 is the network address,
and 192.168.1.223 is the broadcast address.
With this information, we can determine the
first and last usable addresses.
So, here are the answers for Toronto LAN A.  Let’s
check out Tokyo LAN B next.
So, we’ve used all the way to 192.168.1.223
, which is the broadcast address for Toronto
LAN A. There’s not a lot of address space
left, but with VLSM we can fit the last two
subnets into the address space.
The next address after Toronto LAN A’s broadcast
address is Tokyo LAN B’s network address.
Once again, we need to find the prefix length
to use for this subnet.
So, please pause the video here to find these
different addresses for Tokyo LAN B.
Okay, let’s check the answers.
So, because Tokyo LAN B requires 8 hosts,
we must use a /28 prefix length.
One possible mistake here is using a /29 prefix
length.
Although /29 allows 8 addresses, remember
we must subtract two for the network and broadcast
addresses, so really /29 only allows 6 usable
addresses.
Therefore, we must use /26, which allows 14
host addresses.
So, the network address for Tokyo LAN B is
192.168.1.224/28.
Change the host bits to 1, and the broadcast
address is 192.168.1.239.
So, here are the answers for Tokyo LAN B.
Now
there is only one subnet left that we must
assign, and that is the point-to-point connection
between these two routers.
So, we’ve used address space all the way
up to 192.168.1.239.
There’s not a lot of space left, but that’s
no problem.
Point-to-point connections only require 2
addresses.
192.168.1.239 is the network address of Tokyo
LAN B, therefore 192.168.1.240 is the network
address of the point-to-point connection.
Now, what prefix length should we use?
So, as I mentioned in the first subnetting video, it
IS possible to use a /31 prefix length for
a subnet requiring only two hosts.
However, for the CCNA test, if you are asked
what prefix length to use for a subnet that
requires two hosts, I recommend NOT using
a /31.
Instead, what other prefix length allows for
2 hosts?
Pause the video here and find your answers...okay,
let’s check.
So, a /30 prefix length allows for 2 hosts.
192.168.1.240 is the network address, and
192.168.1.243 is the broadcast address.
So here are the answers for the point-to-point
connections.
There are only 2 usable host addresses, 1
for the Tokyo router and one for the Toronto
router.
Okay, so we successfully subnetted this network
using VLSM, and there is still a little bit
of address space left.
Notice that each subnet uses a different prefix
length.
If we tried to use the same prefix length
for each subnet, there wouldn’t be enough
address space, but with VLSM we were able
to do it and leave some extra address space
at the end.
So, here’s a reminder of the steps of VLSM.
Start with the largest subnet and assign it
at the beginning of the address space, and
then proceed to the second largest subnet,
etc. and repeat until you have assigned all
necessary subnets.
VLSM is a great way to use network address
space more efficiently.
So, over these three videos we have done lots
of subnetting practice questions.
However, I recommend that you continue practicing
subnetting using other resources.
Here are three websites that provide excellent
practice.
subnettingquestions.com, subnetting.org, and
subnettingpractice.com.
Check them out and try out questions from
each site.
Here’s an example question from subnettingquestions.com.
It’s similar to the ones we have been doing
in these videos.
And here’s an example question from subnetting.org,
once again the same kind of question as we have
done in these videos.
Those other two websites are good, however
my personal favorite is this last one, subnettingpractice.com.
It has lots of challenging subnetting questions
like this, which go beyond the sort of questions
we have been doing in these videos.
As for today’s quiz, There is no quiz for
this video.
Instead, here is some homework: do at least
ONE practice question from EACH of those practice
websites every day for at least one week.
There is also no flashcard deck for this video.
Those three subnetting practice websites should
give you all of the subnetting practice you
need.
However, there will be a packet tracer practice
lab, where you will practice subnetting a
network and assigning the appropriate IP addresses
to different devices.
Before I wrap up this video, I want to give
a shoutout to my JCNP-level channel members,
Vance, Mike, Yonatan, and Lito.
Thank you again for your support.
Thank you to my JCNA-level channel members
too.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.